I want you to hit me as hard as you can
hi I'm Luke Ryan for Joe Blow calm and
welcome to movie endings explained in
this episode we're going to be looking
at the hugely successful and sometimes
controversial 2019 oscar-winning comic
book movie Joker born of director Todd
Phillips is interesting creating a
realistic and grounded take on the
origin of the Clown Prince of Crime
Joker
follows arthur flack played by joaquin
phoenix as he slowly transformed into
the character we know as the joker
arthur flack is a lonely and mentally
disturbed man who begins the movie
dressed as a garish clown where he is
harassed and beaten up by a group of
young thugs and ends the movie as the
unintentional anarchist leader of a
revolution far removed from every
iteration of the Joker character who is
usually defined by his villainous role
opposite the rogue hero Batman after
flack presents us with a more human and
complicated Joker than we've ever seen
before living alone with his mother
visiting a counselor and trying to make
it as a stand-up comedian Arthur is
presented in a completely sympathetic
light to begin with held back in society
by a condition which forces him to laugh
uncontrollably in uncomfortable
situations
Arthur is an isolated and detached man
who frequently indulges in daydreams
that extend from simply imagining a
talk-show host as the father figure he
never had to an entire fantasy in which
he romances a neighbor we eventually
learned that the majority of his
interactions with her have been entirely
inside his head his grip on reality
really starts to take a downward spiral
when he's harassed again on the subway
and ends up killing three men
in his mind and world it's an act that
frees him and he continues to murder the
people who have wronged him succumbing
further into a persona that boosts his
confidence and furthers his self
liberation after being invited to be a
guest on the Murray Franklin show after
they play a clip from his disastrous
stand-up comedy sets Arthur decides to
make a statement in killing himself live
on air we see him planning this act in
his living room before the show and also
miming it in the dressing room but when
the time comes for Arthur to take the
stage he switches gears once again
murdering a man he believes has wronged
him shooting Murray Franklin live on air
now the transformation from Arthur Fleck
to Joker is complete and he revels in
the madness that he has created when
he's taken away from the show by the
police his killing of the man on the
subway who were up-and-coming Wall
Street elites has been taken as a
statement against the rich and a
movement has been growing throughout the
movie in the public revealing himself as
the subway killer and wreaking chaos on
the Murray Franklin show solidifies
Arthur as the public figurehead of the
mayhem his new followers rescue him from
the police and Arthur takes his place
among the crowd embracing the madness
and the name that Murray Franklin first
gave him when they mocked his stand-up
sets can you introduce me as Joker
that's what you called me on the show
a Joker Joker is it's good thank you and
the Joker is born you wouldn't have been
surprised to see the credits roll here
but a laugh rings out and a final scene
begins to play
Arthur is now in Arkham Asylum seemingly
reflecting on his story the final shot
follows him leaving the room his feet
leaving bloody footprints and he dances
his way down the hallway to Frank
Sinatra as the orderlies chase him out
of view at the end of the hallway the
title card reads the end and we leave
Arthur flex story behind so what's to
explain
well in the case of this film and many
others that have come before in this
series there really isn't a cast-iron
explanation for what the ending means or
represents but
do my best to dig into some
possibilities as always at face value we
follow Arthur's descent into madness his
transition into the Joker in a series of
events that very much frame him as the
hero of his own story this killer is
presented triumphantly at the end
assuming his place as a true villain but
every step of the way we had given
reasons to either sympathize with Arthur
or to empathize with Arthur or even to
pity Arthur you can view him as a person
who has always been bad and that his
mental health issues are no excuse for
his horrific actions or you can view him
as a broken man who was abused since a
child terrorized and neglected by an
unstable mother who is constantly pushed
away and abandoned by society who
unfortunately snaps under all the
pressure or you can view him as all of
those things and the shades of Arthur
Fleck become more grey than black and
white the key though is the final scene
the way it's presented very much feels
like it's signposting the entire movie
is being told through Arthur's
perspective to the counselor in Arkham
Asylum we've already been subject to two
of Arthur's fantasies before in the
Murray Franklin daydream and the
fabrication of a romance with his
neighbor so what's real and what isn't
when we see Arthur dance down the steps
the cigarette and his mouth reappears
after he's already flipped it away is
that a continuity mistake or is that a
sign that he's making up and
embellishing this story as he goes along
the dance sequence is a set routine that
we see play out once and then we see the
same moves player again in slow motion
from different camera angles in the
second section the two police officers
appear at the top of the stairs in the
beginning of the dance though they're
not there at all during the very same
dance steps we see play out a second
time perhaps they're only appearing at
the top of those stairs when Arthur
decides to place them there in his
telling of his journey to Arkham Asylum
throughout the film there is a mystery
around Arthur's parentage an idea that
his father is Thomas Wayne who his
mother penny worked for many years ago
Arthur tracks down his mother's records
from Arkham Asylum which showed the
penny actually adopted Arthur she
maintains though that that
not true and that the immensely powerful
Thomas Wayne fabricated the adoption
papers to keep his name clean
Arthur later finds a photo with a note
on the back from Thomas Wayne to his
mother the given Penny's fragile mental
state it's hard to know which version of
the story to believe or more importantly
which version Arthur believes he ends up
trying to meet Thomas Wayne and has a
brief interaction with a young Bruce
Wayne which is as bizarre as it is
tragic could the Joker and Batman's
origins in this world both be created
from the ashes of their father's death
and that that father is the same man let
alone the fact that the Joker and Batman
in this world could potentially be
half-brothers two sides of the same coin
destined to be joined together forever
upon finally meeting Thomas Wayne Arthur
is met with coldness and contempt this
all contributes to Arthur's inner
implosion but also if this is all a tale
being spun by Arthur in Arkham Asylum it
could easily be an invention designed to
draw pity and/or sympathy as could every
element that portrays Arthur as a victim
and not a villain but at the same time
when we see Arthur in Arkham Asylum at
the end of the movie he is not a man
trying to convince someone that he was
wronged to defend his own morality he is
unhinged and manic he's barely even
looking at the counselor so maybe this
version of events he's been telling is
for his own peace of mind much like the
idea that his childhood abuse the
neglect and head trauma he was subjected
to were completely repressed inside his
mind he shocked to learn these things
about his early life maybe he has
already gone through this process before
sitting down and telling an alternate
version of his life suppressing the
horror and painting himself as the hero
but at this point does Arthur even know
what a hero or a good person is supposed
to be and look like an act another idea
is that this all happened exactly as
Arthur tells it his own self recognized
daydreams and fantasies included but
that this version of the Joker is not
the Joker who would go on to be Batman's
most ardent adversary but the man and
the symbol who inspires the Joker
after all the movie is simply titled
Joker
and not V Joker and Bruce Wayne is so
young that by the time he becomes Batman
Arthur will be fairly old and Arthur
Fleck as presented in Joker bears no
resemblance to the character who
masterminds crime and gleefully creates
chaos
Arthur is at times frail weedy cowardly
but there is a simmering strength and
brewing darkness within him he only
kills the people he believes have
wronged him in some way there is almost
a logic to his actions but absolutely
zero intent in antagonizing or hurting
anyone innocent or even in becoming a
crime lord he embraces his status at the
end not to fulfill his desire to become
a villain but to absorb an identity in
which he is seen by people it's a
different kind of villain from the Joker
we already know the director Todd
Phillips has touched on this theory that
Arthur isn't the true Joker but the
inspiration for what would come later
there's many ways to look at the movie
he might not be Joker this is just a
version of a joke origin it's this
diversion this guy is telling in this
room at a mental institution I don't
know that he's the most reliable
narrator in the world you know what I'm
saying
however Joaquin Phoenix who won the
Oscar for his incredible performance has
stated he believes Arthur is the real
Joker but that that is just his opinion
Todd Phillips similarly has been
non-committal about what the ending
really means merely stating that there
are many ways to interpret it that he
has his own idea of what they're trying
to tell with the movie but that he won't
reveal it anytime soon then there is the
clock theory when we see clocks
throughout the film they all read 11
minutes past 11 from his first meeting
with the counselor with the brief cuts
away to Arkham presumably before the
events of the movie where the clocks
show the exact same time this could be a
clue that everything we're seeing is a
flashback or story being concocted by
Arthur but we also see the same 11 past
11 time on the clock he punches out at
his job Todd Phillips has stated that
the clocks are interesting but entirely
and completely coincidental not
intentional in the slightest I really
don't think I buy that especially when
in the King James Bible chapter and
verse 11 11 reads
therefore thus saith the Lord behold I
will bring evil upon them which they
shall not be able to escape and though
they shall cry unto me I will not
hearken unto them seems pretty fitting
right but at the same time I will
completely admit the conjecture can get
you very far
if you really push it I still think the
clocks are intentional though as the
chaos erupts at the end after Joker
kills Marie we see the Wayne family get
cornered and killed down a dark alley at
this point in the story Arthur has
killed his own mother and we cut between
a young Bruce Wayne in the moment that
his life changes forever and Arthur
Fleck when he finally accepts the mantle
of being Joker when we see Arthur
laughing in Arkham at the end though he
mentions that he's thinking of a joke
and we see Bruce Wayne standing over his
dead parents this image seems to set
Arthur off laughing even more on one
hand he wasn't aware of this murder in
the moment which supports the idea that
he's making it all up or at least
embellishing heavily but also it's
highly likely that he would have heard
the news of the Wayne's being murdered
before he was taken to Arkham and is
imagining this scene finding a horrible
humor in how his potential half brother
is now to an orphan the suggestion that
he kills the counselor off screen at the
end from his bloody footprints also
makes a change in that it's the only
character he kills who presumably has
not wronged him in any way
maybe his justified version of events
where the people he killed in his mind
deserved it a warped maybe his coworker
never gave him that gun but Arthur
decides he did to justify brutally
killing him at the end of the day all I
can think of is the classic Joker story
The Killing Joke by Alan Moore and how
that version of the character states if
he's going to have a backstory he prefer
it to be multiple choice this was an
idea that christopher nolan toyed around
with in his iteration of the Joker
played by Heath Ledger another
oscar-winning performance by having him
tell people different versions of his
backstory throughout the film I prefer
to view Joker a bit more straight
forward that we see an essentially true
version of the story with perhaps a few
adjustments from our most unreliable of
narrators Arthur Fleck ultimately though
the final scene is emblematic of the
uncertain journey we've taken Joe
dances down a brightly little hallway a
complete contrast to the dark and
disturbing story we've just witnessed
and Joker embraces that contrast
gleefully eventually running away from
the orderlies of Arkham Asylum just like
any semblance of truly figuring out
what's reality and what's fiction we as
an audience might have in this story
Joker slips through their fingers
evading capture and perhaps the joke is
on us
[Music]
you